.TH SLOCATE 1 "March 2026" "slocate 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
slocate \- semantic locate: language-agnostic semantic code search
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B slocate
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B slocate
indexes source code repositories using tree-sitter parsing and BGE-base-en-v1.5
embeddings (109M parameter BERT model, 768-dim vectors), then provides fast
semantic search via an HNSW approximate nearest-neighbor index.
.PP
Designed for use as a RAG (retrieval-augmented generation) context provider for
LLM coding assistants. A Claude Code
.B UserPromptSubmit
hook automatically injects relevant code chunks into every prompt.
.PP
Model weights are downloaded lazily on first use (~418 MB) and memory-mapped
at runtime. Cold start is ~210ms including inference.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B install
Download the embedding model, write default config, install the binary to
.IR ~/.local/bin/slocate ,
set up a periodic reindex daemon (launchd on macOS, systemd on Linux),
and run an initial reindex. This is the recommended first step.
.TP
.B add-repo \fIpath\fR
Register a directory as an indexed workspace. The path is stored in the config
file with
.B ~/
expansion for portability.
.TP
.B remove-repo \fIpath\fR
Remove a workspace from the config and delete its index data.
.TP
.B repos
List all configured workspaces.
.TP
.B reindex
Walk all configured workspaces, parse source files with tree-sitter, embed
changed/new chunks, and update the HNSW index. Only re-embeds files whose
mtime or size changed since the last run. A no-op reindex completes in ~170ms.
Typically run automatically by the daemon.
.TP
.B query \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fIquery\fR]
Search the index. If
.I query
is given as a positional argument, use it directly. Otherwise read from stdin:
with
.B \-\-json
expects \fB{"prompt":"..."}\fR JSON (Claude Code hook format), without it reads
plain text. Prints matching code chunks to stdout.
.TP
.B hook \fR[\fB\-\-backend\fR \fIname\fR] \fIquery\fR
Search and format results using a specific LLM hook backend. Supported
backends:
.BR claude " (default),"
.BR gemini .
.TP
.B serve
Start the MCP server (JSON-RPC 2.0 over stdio). Used by Claude Code and other
MCP-compatible clients for tool-based access to
.B search_code
and
.BR index_workspace .
.TP
.B gc
Remove orphaned registry symlinks for workspaces that have been deleted from
disk.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/slocate/config.toml
Configuration file. Defaults to
.IR ~/.config/slocate/config.toml .
Created by
.BR "slocate install" .
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/slocate/models/bge-base-en-v1.5/
Embedding model weights (safetensors + tokenizer). Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/share/slocate/models/bge-base-en-v1.5/ .
Downloaded lazily on first use.
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/slocate/registry/
Symlinks from workspace hashes back to their
.I .slocate/
index directories, enabling workspace enumeration without filesystem scans.
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/slocate/daemon.log
Daemon log file. Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/state/slocate/daemon.log .
.TP
.IR <workspace>/.slocate/index.db
Per-workspace SQLite database containing chunks, embeddings, HNSW graph, file
metadata, and community assignments. Co-located with the workspace so deleting
the workspace cleans up the index.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The config file is TOML with three sections:
.PP
.nf
.RS
[index]
workspaces = ["~/src/myproject"]
reindex_interval_minutes = 10
extensions = ["rs", "py", "ts", "go", "c", "h", "md", "yaml", "yml", "bzl"]
embed_workers = 4
max_file_bytes = 1048576

[model]
dir = "~/.local/share/slocate/models/bge-base-en-v1.5"

[search]
top_k = 5
min_score = 0.72
.RE
.fi
.TP
.B workspaces
List of directories to index. Supports
.B ~/
expansion.
.TP
.B reindex_interval_minutes
How often the daemon triggers a reindex. Default 10.
.TP
.B extensions
File extensions to index. Files with other extensions are skipped.
.TP
.B embed_workers
Number of threads for parallel embedding during reindex. Default 4.
.TP
.B max_file_bytes
Skip files larger than this. Protects against generated files and data blobs.
Default 1 MB.
.TP
.B top_k
Number of search results to return. Default 5.
.TP
.B min_score
Minimum cosine similarity threshold. Results below this are dropped. Default
0.72.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Override config directory (default
.IR ~/.config ).
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Override data directory (default
.IR ~/.local/share ).
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Override state directory (default
.IR ~/.local/state ).
.TP
.B SLOCATE_DEVICE
Set to
.B metal
to force Metal GPU inference on macOS. Default is CPU (Accelerate BLAS), which
matches GPU throughput for this model size with no shader compilation overhead.
.SH HOOKS
To use slocate as automatic RAG context for Claude Code, add to
.IR .claude/settings.json :
.PP
.nf
.RS
"UserPromptSubmit": [{
  "hooks": [{
    "type": "command",
    "command": "slocate query",
    "timeout": 5000
  }]
}]
.RE
.fi
.PP
For git-triggered reindexing, add to
.I .githooks/post-commit
and
.IR .githooks/post-merge :
.PP
.nf
.RS
if command -v slocate >/dev/null 2>&1; then
    slocate reindex >/dev/null 2>&1 &
fi
.RE
.fi
.SH MCP TOOLS
When running as an MCP server
.RB ( "slocate serve" ),
the following tools are available:
.TP
.B search_code
Semantic search over indexed chunks. Accepts
.IR query ,
optional
.IR top_k ,
and optional
.I crate_filter
for path-prefix scoping.
.TP
.B index_workspace
Trigger an incremental reindex of a workspace.
.TP
.B note_to_self
Store a persistent note with semantic embedding for later retrieval.
.TP
.B check_notes
Search stored notes by semantic similarity.
.SH EXAMPLES
Install slocate and index the current project:
.PP
.nf
.RS
slocate install
slocate add-repo .
slocate reindex
.RE
.fi
.PP
Search for code related to "coordinate transforms":
.PP
.nf
.RS
slocate query "coordinate transforms"
.RE
.fi
.PP
Pipe a Claude Code hook payload:
.PP
.nf
.RS
echo '{"prompt":"how does the parser work"}' | slocate query --json
.RE
.fi
.SH PERFORMANCE
.TP
.B No-op reindex
~170ms (mtime/size check on all files, no embedding)
.TP
.B Incremental reindex
~8s for 2-3 changed files (model load + embed + HNSW update)
.TP
.B Query
~210ms end-to-end (model load + embed query + HNSW search)
.TP
.B Model load
72ms (mmap, no data copied into memory until inference)
.SH AUTHORS
JP Pittman
.SH LICENSE
Apache License 2.0
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR locate (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR rg (1)
